notes:

train/test/validation split:
TRAINING(MODEL BUILDING)
VALIDATION (MODEL SELECTION & OPTIMIZATION eg. grid search cv)
TEST(MODEL FINAL EVALUATION)



eda
feature selection/extraction: baruta, forward/backward selection
transform: min/max scale, normalize,stadardize   (may lose interpretability for accuracy)
dimension reduction (if required)
model choose
evalution


Models:
KNN:
knn works well non linear boundaries and small dataset.
does not work well for real time classification like email spam as its slow. (naive bayes works better)


Regression:
1) Regularization introduces penalty term for laarge coefficients.
regualarized linear regression used for relatively less data observations compared to features. necessary to scale. basically introduces bias. i.e simplifies model.
types of regularized are:
ridge: parameter alpha. higher alpha means higher penalty for large coefficients. uses L2 regularization penalty (alpha * sum of squares of coef)
lasso: parameter alpha. uses L1 regualarization (alpha * sum of absolute coef). converts less important coef to zero.
use ridge when most variables are useful and lasso when most variables are useless as it makes their coeff zero.

2) polynomial linear regression:
y=ax1+bx2+cx1x2+dx1^2+ex2^2
it captures interactions between different variables that simple linera regression cant.
often combined with regularization as the number of variables increase with polynomial terms

3) Logistic Regression:
Can be used to classify binary classes.
gives result as a probabilty b/w 0 and 1
e(p)/1+e(p)
interpret coef: coef give log of odds of outcome given 1 unit increase in variable. 
in sklearn c is inverse regularization . c increases variance increses and bias decreases.default: 1

4)Poisson Regression:
used for count data. e^coef gives estimated mean increase per unit increase in variable

SVM:
classifier. that use maximum margin. (maximize distnce between two classes using a hyperplane)
kernels: are basically the way to separate classes. Linea kernel gives a linearly separable svm hyperplane.
C defines how strictly accurate u wanna be with training.  c basically increases with variance(complexity) of model. low c means model tried to have maximum margin even with some misclassification in trainnig.
SVM:always scale data.
used for high or low dimensional data. its versatile to the type of data. Not suitable for very large data sets.

Support vector machines can classify linear or non linearly depending on kernel.
kernelized svm classify data which are not linearly separble.
kernelized svm transform the input data space to high dimensional feature space to separate classes. Ex x to [x,x^2].
kernels are basically similiarity measures between original data point and transformed data point in feature space. (the transformation function)
Kernels: linear,poly, RBF(radial basis functiton). Default: RBF
poly: parameter-degree
rbf: parameter- gamma. gamma determines influence of each trainng point. small gamma = more influence i.e. the influence of every point reacher far. more gamma means more rough boundaries/varince


Decision Trees:

prone to overfitting.doesnt generalize well. Only use one feature at a time. hence Scaling is not required, uses only straight lines and many splits are needed for curvature.
they are fast (binary search), intuitive and interpretable
control overfitting via limiting max_depth,min_samples,max_leafnodes. 
pruning or back pruning: remove splits
generalise using ensemble
use misclassification error/gini index/id3 for splits.
gini index= sigma p * (1-p). where p is probability of getting observation right for a particular class. summed over all classes.
gini index separates off large number of pure cells.



Random Forest:
Use multiple dtc and ensemble.
bootstrap n points from original sammple with replacements to get many samples

bagging: train a classifier on each bootstrapped sample and average the results. It reduces high variancea and overfiiting.
	
Random forest: train a classifier on each bootstrap sample and at each split sample from features.  
parameters: n_estimator: number of trees, max_features: features at each split (1 complex and different trees, n simple and similar trees).max_depth, n_jobs                                     

Naive Bayes:
called naive coz it assumes no coorelation between features. Based on conditional probability.
used for text data.
types:  bernoulli (binary feature like word present or not)
	multinomial (discrete features like word counts)
	gaussian (continuous features like mean,std)
the classes are enclosed in gaussian/normal parabolas 
The classification boundaries for gaussian naive bayes are parabolic.
Efficient for large datasets.


GradientBoostedDT:
sequential trees where each tree tries to correct the mistakes of previous trees..
Weak learners are ensembled.
paraeters:	Learning rate controls complexity of trees
		max_depth
		n_estimators






Neural nets:
Multilayer perceptrons use hidden layers in between input and output
require preprocesssing like normalization
parameters: hidden_layer_sizes=number of units in each layer, number of layers
	    alpha = regularization parmeter. higher alpha lower variance.
	    activation= 'relu','tanh','logistic'
	    solver= finds optimal weights


Classification:
KNN
SVM linear or kernalized
Logistic Regression
Note: multiclass classsification works by doing binary classification on each class against all other classes and choosing the one with highest probability/score.
Naive Bayes

REgression:
Linear- Simple, Multiple, Regularized(penalty):lasso and ridge, polynomial.
Knn
SvM
regression evaluation:
r2
mse
rmse
amse














classification Evaluation:

sensitivit/recall = tp/tp+fn.  	(leans towards classifying +ve): if someone has disease we better get them right.
fraction of positive class that are classified correctly
we want to get all positive points classified positive. eg get all cancer patients as postitive even if it means diagonosing healhy ppl as cancer

Precison= tp/tp+fp         	(leans towards classifying -ve) : if we classified someone as having disease we better be right.
fraction of positive predictions that are classified correctly
we want to get all negative ones right. or reduce false positives. we want to be extremely careful while cclassifying something as positive
eg commercial ad system. which ad to show.


specificity: if someone doesnt have a disease we better get that right.
 tn/tn+fp


f1 score:
combines recall and precision.



Power:
probability of rejectin Ho when it is false
Confidence interal:
probability of failing to reject Ho when it is true




Model selection:
cross_validatiion_score
gridsearchcv

model can be optimized for different evalutaion metrics like recall precion etc for classification or r2,mse for regression.
choose depending on application.








To reduce False Negaive(like in case of cancer diagnosis or mobile churning) decrease the threshold for probability to less than 0.5. this way, even at smaller probabilities classifier predicts positive. hence reducing false negatives.
the threshold in these cases should be approx equal to :
t= r/(1-r)
where 
r= (Cfp-Ctn)/(Cfn-Ctp)
refer: https://matterhorn.dce.harvard.edu/engage/player/watch.html?id=4676adde-557f-469b-bca8-5ffe868094eb


IN ROC curve:

ğ‘‡ğ‘ƒğ‘…=1/(ğ‘(1ğ´)(ğ‘ğ¹ğ‘âˆ’ğ‘ğ‘‡ğ‘ƒ))*(ğ‘(1ğ´)ğ‘ğ¹ğ‘ƒ+ğ‘(0ğ´)ğ‘ğ‘‡ğ‘âˆ’ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘ ğ‘¡)+ğ‘Ÿ(ğ‘(0ğ´)/ğ‘(1ğ´))Ã—ğ¹ğ‘ƒğ‘…


therefore,
slope= r * p(0A)/p(1A)

Therefore general fule of thumb:
To penalize FN:  increase intercept
To penalize FP: decrease intercept.

